---
layout: post
title: The Tyranny of the Majority
category: thoughts
tags: mob-mentality, cancel-culture, social-media
use_math: false
excerpt_separator: <!--eof-->
---

> Nothing is more wonderful than the art of being free, but nothing is harder to learn how to use than freedom.
>
> — Alexis de Tocqueville

There is a fine line between the social and the political. Only a permeable membrane separates them, allowing them to combine occasionally. 
Recently, I read a [post](https://medium.com/@sarahadowney/this-politically-correct-witch-hunt-is-killing-free-speech-and-we-have-to-fight-it-7ced038d33ae) on political correctness and its adverse effects on free speech. It read like a rant, but I thought that its points were valid. “Cancel culture” and mob mentality restricts public discourse. It prevents citizens from deliberating on the issues that plague society by promulgating one narrative and stifling any alternate perspectives from gaining traction. 
The one peculiar feature I’ve noticed of modern-day discourse on free speech is, at least in the United States, that the tenet of free speech is increasingly a problem *among* citizens rather than *between* citizens and the government. The [First Amendment ](https://www.law.cornell.edu/constitution/first_amendment)detailed how citizens are given the right to free speech and how the **government** cannot take this right away or impede citizens from exercising it. However, the amendment’s application ends there. In **between citizens**, the First Amendment offers little protection. Sure, I can theoretically say whatever I want to anyone I want, but mob mentality dampens this ability. Not only that, but slander, defamation and libel laws inhibit citizens from being able to exercise free speech to its fullest extent. Of course, these laws do exist for good reasons, but there are [instances of its abuse](https://hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng#{"fulltext":["\"CASE OF LINGENS v. AUSTRIA\""],"documentcollectionid2":["GRANDCHAMBER","CHAMBER"],"itemid":["001-57523"]}). 
Some may say that this is not true. The First Amendment admits the right to freedom of speech to any citizen and *no one* can take this away from them. However, as many argue, censorship, especially on the Internet, [is](https://jsis.washington.edu/news/censoring-collective-identity-chinese-cybersecurity-policy-uyghurs/) [rampant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Censorship_by_Google). [Social](https://www.msn.com/en-us/news/technology/former-facebook-employees-wrote-a-letter-to-the-companys-leaders-criticizing-their-cowardly-decision-not-to-take-action-against-trumps-posts/ar-BB14ZEp0) [media](https://www.nationalreview.com/2019/03/the-social-media-censorship-dumpster-fire/) companies have been terrible at regulating speech and their policies actually further inhibit discussion. All the while, the government sits idle because the First Amendment does not and cannot regulate citizen-citizen interactions and, more specifically, citizen-company interactions*.

Discourse between individual people is poorly regulated. Any mob with enough will can strike down a [journalist](https://www.lamag.com/citythinkblog/fiona-moriarty-mclaughlin-cleanup-photo/) or [professor](https://www.foxnews.com/media/cornell-professor-says-calls-for-his-firing-over-protest-criticism-almost-totalitarian) for dissenting against popular opinion. Any mob can shame someone for saying anything even remotely “offensive.” However, the legal argument for freedom of speech cannot be applied because the other party can claim that they are protected as well. You cannot prosecute a Twitter pile-on for suppressing free speech because they have the right to freedom of speech as well. It’s social conventions and, effectively, peer pressure that suppress discourse; those who cannot handle the pressure (whether its in the form of verbal assault or doxxing) are exiled into silence. While laws can sculpt social conventions and change public perception, they cannot fully dictate the behavior of the public. Therefore, if the mob wants to burn someone at the stake, they can do it without repercussions. This dichotomy between social and political “laws“ prevents us from being able to have firm jurisdiction over public discourse.

Of course, that’s not to say that I would like the dichotomy between the social and political to be demolished. There are [obvious reasons](https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2018/02/china-surveillance/552203/) that we should not do that. However, the current mob is essentially creating a mini-dictatorship that can get people fired for saying something slightly inflammatory and ruin their reputation over any minute utterance. The only way to regulate the mob — to which I dedicate the next few paragraphs — is to hold Internet companies accountable.

The Internet is probably the most widespread forum for political discussion in the twenty-first century. However, despite the intents of its innovators, it has unraveled into a corrupt sandpit where shouting matches are more prevalent than intellectual discussion. While social media companies may like to pretend that they have no place in this dilemma, they are liable. Massive disinformation campaigns and the hyper-diffusion of information has served to make the Internet an excellent place to name-and-shame people even if they do not deserve it. Social media companies have the ability to prevent this disinformation and design their platforms in a way that encourages intellectual discussion and collaboration. 

Instead, they’ve created a system that feeds on pure sentiment and reactionary content. How to design a system that does the opposite, I’m not sure. However, I think that these companies should be further incorporated into this conversation. We shouldn’t just attack companies for perpetuating hate speech or violating privacy (although these are important issues as well), we should also hold them accountable for the design of their platforms. While moderating social media with humans and AI does help to an extent, the solution is likely not in either of those technologies. Rather, the solution is, predictably, more difficult: designing a social media platform so that users cannot collectively spread misinformation and destroy reputations while encouraging healthy discussion. This is a hard problem, but it’s the key to stopping online harassment, *ad hominem*, and the tyranny of the majority from establishing an Orwellian social order where no one can say anything.

This is a never-ending discussion. The First Amendment is intentionally ambiguous, perhaps to give some leeway to its users. However, it’s critical that we stop mob mentality from destroying the platforms that we regard as a place for discussion and collaboration. The [creators of the Internet](https://www.amazon.com/Innovators-Hackers-Geniuses-Created-Revolution/dp/1476708703) did not intend for this to happen. While the techno-optimism of the ‘60s is gone, we can still be realistic about our situation and fix it for posterity. The Internet, as much as it is a place for thoughtful discussion and a decentralized database of knowledge, is also a place for misinformation and abuse. To fix it requires that we take [Licklider’s principle](https://groups.csail.mit.edu/medg/people/psz/Licklider.html)s to heart, and try to establish a human-machine symbiosis that isn’t parasitic and toxic. To stop the tyranny of the majority, we need to rethink how social media platforms are built.

\[*\] By citizen-citizen interactions and citizen-company interactions, I mean the suppression of an individual’s right to free speech by another individual and the suppression of an individual’s right to free speech by a company, respectively.

<!--eof-->