---
layout: post
title: Unexpected Hiatus
date: 2020-05-01 11:54:00
summary: It's been quite a while.
categories: life
---

So...



It's been a pretty long time since I've posted. I don't have many reasons for why, but I guess I got busy, started procrastinating, and, to be frank, I didn't have anything to talk about. 

Over the past few months, I've started becoming a lot more cognizant about how I manage my time and I became more productive as a result. This post is mainly to articulate my future goals with this blog and my own personal projects.

When it comes to this blog, I have some plans to redesign it. I don't mind how it looks right now (I could care less about aesthetics), but I think that it needs some more refinement, color, and a better UX. Also, I plan to post *everyday*. 

Yes, everyday. I want to post something new everyday. It doesn't have to be anything groundbreaking or anything particularly interesting. It could just be about Leetcode problems I solved or problems I solved on Project Euler or problems I solved from my math textbook or about something I learned.

I think writing about the things I learn and the problems I solve will not only give me more clarity of mind, but I think it's good to articulate the steps you took to solve a problem. After doing some coursework, studying, and problem-solving, I've realized that honestly, I'm not really brilliant or even good at solving problems. My thinking is a bit sporadic and more unorganized than I thought it was.

Over just the past few weeks, I think I've gotten better. But I'm still lacking, and even today I had to look up some of the problems I was solving on Leetcode because I got stumped. 



So that's what I want to do with the blog. Post everyday about anything, no matter how mundane. Similarly, I've decided to also start tearing through some of my coursework and textbooks. I've been pretty flexible with my schedule when it comes to tackling these things, but I think something a little more rigid and focused would help. Currently, the three textbooks I want to get through are:

* Algorithms 4th Edition
* Calculus — An Intuitive and Physical Approach
* The C Programming Language (Kernighan)

I think the last one will be pretty easy to get through, considering it's only 8 chapters and it's about a subject that I've been acquainted with for quite a while. The other two are much longer projects, but I think trying to invest more time in them will be worthwhile.

I have a bunch of other stuff in my head, but this post is too long and I think I should get to work.

Cheers.
