---
layout: post
title: "Notes on Democracy in America; Volume 1; Part 1; Chapter 1"
date: 2020-05-24 15:36
summary: Notes and thoughts on Volume 1; Part 1; Chapter 1 (by Alexis de Tocqueville).
categories: notes
---

I decided to start reading *Democracy in America* by Alexis de Tocqueville, the "public philosopher" of America. The edition I'm reading not only includes the historically significant novel in its completion, but also two essays on America that Tocqueville wrote, one of which I believe was never published. Normally, when I read books that are nonfiction and non-technical, I tend to read them like a novel. However, now that I have time, I thought that I should document my thoughts and note down some points of interest when I read these types of books. This article will cover my notes and thoughts on *Democracy in America*, Volume 1; Part 1; Chapter 1. The edition I'm reading can be found [here](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00BQ4664I?tag=duckduckgo-ffab-20&linkCode=osi&th=1&psc=1).



## Introduction

Before I start covering this chapter, I should add some background that was given by the authors. Tocqueville was a French aristocrat born in 1805. His family was Catholic and part of the lower nobility, being loyal to three French kings. The French Revolution had spread the ideals of fraternity, equality, and liberty not only in France but all across the world, and Tocqueville, an ambitious and thoughtful young man, would be shaped by these ideas. While his life is quite interesting, I think it's worth understanding the events that led to *Democracy in America*. Essentially, the new citizen king vexed Tocqueville, so he decided to leave for the United States under the guise of studying their penal code in order to reform the prison system in France. His real motive, however, for leaving for the United States was to study their broader political and economic system, such as their central government, the principles of federalism, and the socioeconomic conditions of the people. 

With that in mind, *Democracy in America* can be seen as a snapshot of the United States. It's an outside view of the country, meaning that the biases that stem from Tocqueville's account are likely cultural in nature. Tocqueville, like many men of his era, shared Eurocentric biases that distorted their perspectives on other races and sexes. Therefore, it's important to keep in mind that any sense of grandeur or deterioration relative to a certain cultural group in this book is probably hyperbolic.

## Notes and Thoughts on Volume 1; Part 1; Chapter 1

This part and chapter of the book focuses primarily on the geography of the United States. I'll admit, I originally thought of analyzing some other chapters in addition to this one because I wasn't sure whether anything particularly new or insightful would be brought by Tocqueville to the table. Of course, if he didn't bring anything new, I wouldn't be writing this on solely chapter 1. In this chapter, Tocqueville discusses about North America and how it differs to South America, noting how its more "serious" and "weighty" than the tropical haven that is South America. More interestingly, however, are his references to the Native Americans and their history on the continent. Firstly, he describes the countenance and physical makeup of the Native Americans, stating how they have "reddish skin" and "long hair" and "gleaming lips." For a postmodern generation, this is a strange way to talk about a cultural group. However, during this period of time, categorization of the races was ordinary, and was utilized to construct the theories of superiority and scientific racism that would appear in the latter half of the nineteenth century. 

After describing the appearance of the Native Americans (which is **very** generalized), he discusses about the primitive and vulgar nature of the natives but, to my surprise, commends them on certain aspects. For example, he talks about them being selfless people who wouldn't hesitate to die for their neighbor. He states that their societies are "pure" and free of the vices of "civilized" men, particularly saying that the weren't "coarse" like the poor in civilized countries. That is, while the Native Americans were, in his view, poor and ignorant, they were still free and equal in society. In the beginning of the book, the authors had stated in a prologue that Tocqueville is often quoted by virtually all parts of the political spectrum. While I haven't read much yet, I can immediately see why: Tocqueville, with all his biases and faults, is still cumalatively neutral. In essence, he acknowledges the good and bad of whatever he is discussing about. Though North America is not as tropical as South America, there is still beauty to its mountains and valleys. Though the natives are primitive, vulgar savages with simple ideas of existence and are uncivilized, they are equal, free, selfless, and honorable.  The acknowledgement of the multidimensionality of the world is, as I can see and understand through this short chapter, what makes Tocqueville such a worshipped figure in American politics. Every side can cherrypick some example of Tocqueville supporting their point, and thus defend their viewpoint by showing Tocqueville's. 

Before I finish discussing about Tocqueville's point, I want to remark on some interesting things Tocqueville nonchalantly mentioned. For one, he discusses about the idea that the Native Americans originated from Asia, stating that they might have arrived at the continent via the Bering Strait. Of course, this conjecture wasn't his own; it was, as I have learned, a proposition made by anthropologists of the time. In addition to this, he mentions how there was "undoubtedly" a more advanced, civilized race that preceded the modern-day (i.e, 19th century) Native Americans. Here's what he says:

> An obscure tradition, although one widely known to the majority of the Indian tribes of the Atlantic seaboard, informs us that, once upon a time, the settlement of these same races had been situated to the west of the Mississippi. Along the banks of the Ohio and in the Central Valley, we still find, every day, man-made tumuli...human bones, strange instruments, weapons, metal utensils...What a strange thing! There are races which have so utterly disappeared from the earth that even the memory of their name has been blotted out...

I'm assuming that he is referring to the ancient Mississippi civilization and the earth mounds of cities like [Cahokia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cahokia). I'm not sure how much knowledge was available at this point about the history of the Americas, but I'm surprised that they even thought about the Bering Strait hypothesis. In all honesty, I predict that Tocqueville will continually underestimate the Native Americans and their ancient history. He'll continue to remark about nineteenth Native Americans as if somehow they are fully representative of the culture that was erased from the continent just a few centuries prior. Like all European men of the time, I don't think he will be able to comprehend the fact that, indeed, the Native Americans were extremely advanced and their civilizations were, at their zenith, comparable to the Europeans and Asians. Just like with the Africans, it's likely that Tocqueville will dismiss this cultural group. Then again, judging from his analysis of the Native Americans in this first chapter, it's possible that he might (reluctantly) acknowledge their sophistication as a culture even if he points out their "flaws" or tries to characterize them as primitive.

## Conclusion

Tocqueville has surprised me. Somehow, I thought the first chapter was going to be a boring, dull exposition on the geography of North America. However, it was instead about the mysterious nature of the continent and its flaws and wonders. And rather than just label the continent as being virgin land that was unconquered for thousands of years, he acknowledges that other human civilizations existed here, even entertaining the idea that the civilizations that were here prior to the arrival of the Europeans were extremely advanced and civilized. So, while he is still quite a man of his time, he has proven that he is at least somewhat quite sophisticated in his conception of other cultural groups. The next post will be about Volume 1; Part 1; Chapters 2-3, as I would like to cover more of the book.